The Earring of the Definitive Meaning: The Speech That Classifies the Tenets Having bowed to the guru, who is the vajra of the mind, The face of the three doors of liberation, And whose nature is the unconditioned sphere of phenomena, I will briefly expound answers to queries. General Background The lord who expresses nonduality Taught inconceivable causal and resultant vehicles To the trainees of the three families To bring them to their liberated states. All beings who do not realize that, Having adopted partisan views, disturb the teachings. These are fabrications of the teachings Belonging to the activities of Mahādeva. Within this, everything from the Great Exposition school among the Hearers To the vajra essence of the supreme secret Is correctly taught as a means to realize The suchness of the singular reality of phenomena. The Common Philosophical Characteristic of Extremists All of the extremists Who greatly delight in preaching eternalism and nihilism Are united in accepting the existence of a self of a person That is permanent, unitary, and independent of aggregates. Some of the Salient Features of the Four Buddhist Doxographical Schools With respect to the self, those who expound our own system Establish its nonexistence because it is not observed As being either identical to or separate from the aggregates, And also in other terms.  Based on this, the followers of the Great Exposition school have not abandoned even gross grasping At the selfhood of phenomena, Since they assert the true existence of the grasped object as atoms And the grasping consciousness as a partless instant. The followers of the Sūtra school abandon grasping At the gross selfhood of apprehended phenomena Since they assert all external phenomena as the perceiving aspects of the mind, Yet they assert the cause of that to be external phenomena. Although the followers of the Mind-Only school have ascertained the non-trueness Of subject-object duality on account of establishing the nonexistence Of matter as characterized by spatial parts and consciousness as characterized by temporal parts, They still assert the nondual thoroughly established nature to be true. Through the five great reasonings, the Autonomists Establish even that as lacking selfhood, Presenting the ultimate as lacking essence And the conventional as it appears. The Consequentialists, having abandoned all elaborate propositions With regard to imputation and depreciation, Are endowed with the uniqueness of destroying others' propositions Through the reasoning that shows internal contradictions. The Similarity between the Consequentialist School and the Great Perfection Given that the Consequentialist school and the Great Perfection are of the same taste With regard to the inconceivable dharmatā In the state beyond cognition, Look at this with the mind of utter meditative equipoise. The Difference between the Mind-Only School and the Other-Emptiness Tradition The two-namely, the stainlessly pure Mind-Only school And the Other-Emptiness tradition-are not similar. This is on account of the former asserting consciousness as ultimate, While the latter asserts wisdom as ultimate. The Path and Fruit Tradition and Its Difference from the Mind-Only School The followers of the Path and Fruit tradition Establish appearances as mind, With the perceptions of mind as illusion and that illusion also as lacking essence. This is further classified as being interdependent and beyond expression.  Yet, the erroneous conception that sees This position as similar to the realists In asserting appearances as mind Is the fault of not having subtly investigated. It is thus stated in the Vajra Tent Tantra: Apart from the precious mind, There are neither buddhas nor beings. The abode or the object of consciousness Does not even slightly exist externally. And the Tantra of Union states as follows: All those things characterized as possessing selfhood, external or internal, Are to be investigated in terms of mind. Apart from the mind, They do not exist elsewhere. These are noted and their rationale is accordingly stated by the savior Nāgārjuna: With regard to a single external form, Consciousnesses engage differently. A beautiful form Appears differently to others. With regard to a single female form, It turns out to have three aspects- Filth, something desired, and something to be eaten- To the ascetic, lusty one, and a dog, respectively. Thus, this type of argument establishes the proposition. In particular, even though it is similar to the Mind-Only school Concerning the mode of asserting selfhood as mind, The mind is still not asserted as truly established Since it is accepted as free from elaborations. The Similarity between the Path and Fruit Tradition and the Great Perfection Furthermore, the luminous Great Perfection, as in the Great Tantra of Self-Arising, Extensively elaborates on the levels of views, From the extremists that expound eternalism and nihilism  To the supreme secret-namely, the vajra essence. Likewise, the Root Tantra of Hevajra states the following: On that the followers of the Great Exposition school teach; In like manner do the followers of the Sūtra school. After that teach the followers of the Yoga Practice school, And then afterward the followers of the Middle-Way school. These and so on are clearly stated. How the Path and Fruit Tradition Surpasses the Teachings of the Four Doxographical Schools Virūpa, the lord of the yogis, For the gradual engagement of practitioners Taught the essential meaning of interpretations That surpasses the extremists And the two similar schools of the Hearers, though having commonalities with them, Since they teach aggregates, elements, and spheres of perception. Inasmuch as it asserts the nonexistence Of objects and consciousness, and the lack of nature With respect to nonduality other than those, It also surpasses the Mind-Only school. It is also superior to the Middle-Way school, Which asserts that although the conventional appears like illusion An intrinsic essence does not exist, Yet does not assert a "this is it" thesis with regard to the ultimate. Therefore, transcending the four extremes Primordially fabricated by the mind, Practicing in union Is the ultimate import of this path. Furthermore, not being mere words But the moment of bursting forth from basic space By means of the discriminating wisdom of the ultimate, It is of a single taste with the Great Perfection. The Difference between the Great Perfection and the Path and Fruit Tradition In brief, the teachings of immediate introduction to awareness Within the profound and secret heart essence Are meant for those with superb faculties And those who belong to the lineage of the sudden realizers.  The manner of verbal instruction in the exposition Of the Path and Fruit tradition is a gradual one. If one correctly understands this mode, Fabricated contradictions will be pacified in basic space. The Difference between the Path and Fruit and the Other-Emptiness Traditions The lord of yogis Virūpa presented the nature of mind As the union of luminosity and emptiness, While the proponents of Other-Emptiness presented a thoroughly established buddha nature. Even though these two share an identical epithet, their meanings are different. If asked why, it is as the Mañjunātha Sakya Paṇḍita said: Therefore, since buddha nature Is devoid of elaborations, The appearance of the Buddha and cyclic existence To sentient beings is viable. Thus, with this and other arguments, Buddha nature is established as being free from elaborations. The Other-Emptiness school asserts it as permanent, stable, and thoroughly established. Hence, is there an occasion where these are asserted as similar? Therefore, the great Omniscient One said the following: Natural luminosity is like a crystal Transformed by latencies, like paint, From which appear multiple states. This sphere is the basis of all, saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. And to illuminate the meaning of this: Here, Maitreyanātha and Nāgārjuna accept Luminous, continuous, and unimpeded mind, Which is free from the elaborations of the four extremes. This uncompounded coalescence is asserted as the ground. Hence, the scriptures and reasoning extensively establish The manner in which the intentions of the Two great charioteers are collected as one.  The signification of this basis of illustration is stated as follows: The dharmadhātu, the stained reality, Luminosity, buddha nature, Pure nature of mind, and so forth Are taught as being synonymous with multiple appellations. The Laṅkāvatāra and the Ghanavyūha, The pith instruction of the lord of yogis, And the venerable, illustrious Candrakīrti and others Accept the term "basis of all" as that . In the profound tantras, terms such as "Mañjuśrī," "Great wisdom," "innately arisen," "Vajra," "Vajrasattva," "glorious," And "Samantabhadra" are countlessly taught as being synonymous with the ground. One must investigate these clear statements With a keen intelligence. Apart from this, asserting that buddha nature Is a mere negation of inherent nature through reasoning With respect to the stained mind, Proposing it as being truly established nature, and so on Are shown through correct reasoning as falling into the extremes of imputation and denigration. Yet here, as a middle way, for the time being, It will be kept without negation or affirmation. Deliberations on the Wisdom of the Buddha With regard to the wisdom of the Buddha, which is the result, The Autonomist tradition of the Middle Way school asserts It as nonexistence, and the Other-Emptiness school asserts It as permanent, stable, and unchanging. The Consequentialist tradition, which includes the proponents of the ultimate definitive meaning, Asserts it as being free from any thesis of existence and nonexistence Since it does not abide together with cognition And is in the domain of the inconceivable. The presentation of the nonexistence of wisdom in the sūtras  Is intended so that its nonexistence Is associated with defiled phenomena. This is intended to ward off grasping at permanence. In some discourses, wisdom is also stated as existing. This refers to the inconceivable and inexpressible wisdom That pervades all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. This is intended to clear the extreme of nihilism. In reality, when one directly realizes the mode of existence That transcends the two extremes And is beyond propositions, the elaborations of eternalism And nihilism are pacified within the basic sphere. Advice to Practice If one aspires to know the meaning of these correctly Without abiding in single-pointed meditative equipoise In a secluded and delightful forest, It will never be realized through the sophistry of the intellectual. Therefore, you privileged one, Having drunk the essence of profound meaning like a young sun, May your supreme intelligence bloom like a white lotus And through the path of meditation be enriched with the resultant state of abandonment. Although you have offered an infinitude of questions On account of your superb and marvelous knowledge, I am conditioned by ignorance and laziness. How then is there an opportunity to answer extensively? Yet, with regard to what was briefly offered here, May hosts of defects be cleared, And through this virtue may all ocean-like sentient beings Attain the state of omniscience. Sarvadā kalyāṇaṃ bhavatu. 
